Conceptually, making everyone feel welcome in the office is a no-brainer. So much of a no-brainer, I think, that it is often overlooked. It’s easy to assume that everyone is having a good time and feeling comfortable – no one’s saying anything to the contrary, right? Of course, those who feel unwelcome or those who feel that their insecurities are being pushed just a little too often will hardly ever say anything about it. It is exceedingly important to make sure that everyone in the office (and remote folks) feel welcome and safe. Sure, it will it reduce distractions from those feeling unsafe, but more importantly, it is kind. If I feel unwelcome in the office, how will I feel about spending so much time there?

What types of behaviors make people feel unwelcome and why are we overlooking them? I think a lot of it revolves around jokes – everyone understands what a joke is and that, often, no malice is intended. Plus, who doesn’t love to crack a joke and harvest reactions from the lunch table or #random? It feels good. But who’s the butt of these jokes? And how does the joke teller’s _intent_ level with the _impact_ on the butt? Sure, a joke landing on some confident individual may be harmless, but do you know who in your office is confident? Who has which insecurities? Who thrives on self-deprecation? If you’re unsure then you should not be making jokes at these peoples’ expenses.

Let’s say I’m a bit older than the rest of the team. I’m well aware of my age and how ageism manifests in tech. I’m a little apprehensive about finding my next job and the feeling of being trapped is settling into my psyche. If my coworker often brings up that I’m slow on the uptake or don’t get the latest memes, my insecurity about my age will begin to deepen and I’ll feel that it’s not merely an insecurity, but a truth others are recognizing and validating. Certainly the comments about my speed come off as jokes (“welcome to the conversation from five minutes ago, Matt!”) or perhaps speaking to me in memes that I make me more aware of the generational gap (“that’s worse than 30-50 feral hogs storming your backyard!”). Maybe my coworkers use my name as a synonym for this sort of behavior as well (“you really pulled a Matt just then”, “that was a Matt Piazza sized commit”).

But not all unwelcome feelings are derived from insecurities. There are plenty of opportunities for inside jokes and references in medium and large sized teams. If me and Tim are always talking in references, it makes other people feel excluded and unwelcome – they have nothing to add to the conversation because they don’t know the underlying reference.

That said, what can we do about it? Pay attention when your colleagues are talking; obviously in meetings, but when they’re talking about their personal lives as well. Stash away some of their interests. Ask about them later – either to interrupt some ongoing inside joke or just to give them an opportunity to let others get to know them. This is particularly useful for folks who aren’t loud or don’t typically say much when groups are chatting. Just talk about something they’re involved or interested in; make them feel respected and valued. Point out strengths, don’t harp on weaknesses (no matter how funny they may seem to the rest of the group). But there is a fine line to walk here – if you only know one thing about a coworker and you always bring it up it will get repetitive and make them hyper-aware of this (possibly minuscule) aspect of their being. When you find yourself reaching into a stale bag of fun facts, refresh those facts. Branch off of something you already know about them (“I saw a new Turkish restaurant opened up in your neighborhood – have you been? Do you like Turkish cuisine? What do you like instead?”). I will say that it is a very strange feeling when the only thing a coworker knows about you is that you eat a banana every day. I hope that is not the most obvious, appealing, or interesting facet of my life.

