---
layout: post
title: Tech Internship Navigation for Students and Hiring Managers
date: '2017-03-08T19:17:37-06:00'
tags:
- internships
- computer science
tumblr_url: http://mattpiazza.com/post/158169351600/interning
---
(four great interns in a decommissioned datacenter)While I was in school, I had the formative privilege of interning with a range of different organizations. I’ve found that what I aimed to learn in each experience remained fairly consistent, while my employers’ expectations varied wildly. I think of internships as long-term interviews during which the intern should strive to provide value to their employer. It’s also a great opportunity for a young person without a tight grasp on the industrial landscape to get a feel for different work environments before committing to a permanent position. At the same time, employers should dance along with their interns - pushing them to figure out how much value they could bring to the organization in a full-time setting.Gaining work experience before graduation is one of the most useful, rewarding pursuits a young person can follow. Students have the opportunity to apply what they’re learning in the classroom which helps with both information retention in the classroom and job performance at the office. At the same time, there’s a whole bunch of stuff going on out in the wild that is nowhere on the syllabus; picking up these industry practices is significantly easier in the workplace than in a side project. Internships are possibly the only way to slowly mold your lifestyle from the classroom to the office with limited shock. And, oftentimes, STEM internships offer wages better than standard entry-level part-time jobs. It’s hard to speak for other industries, but no one should be taking unpaid computer science internships in 2017. There are often clear-cut laws regarding how and when internships can be unpaid; interns are usually forbidden from doing work and relegated to ‘shadowing’ or whatever when they’re unpaid. If you’re considering taking an unpaid internship please log on to google.com and search for your local labor laws.	Asking too much of your interns is myopic and greedy. It is very simple: Asking two part-time interns to build your product from the ground up with no technical oversight is exploitative. Sure, it might feel cheap in the short term, but as soon as you scale up and bring in experienced developers to maintain the likely repulsive codebase it will become an obvious sore. Unrestrained youths have a lot of ideas, but let me assure you that only a small fraction of those should be realized and made available to the general public.	I have, however, had the pleasure of re-building a product from the ground up as an intern. The experience was beneficial to me since there was adequate technical oversight and it was at an established company with developed infrastructure. And the company benefited by getting a decent proof-of-concept out of it. The expectations were set along the lines of ‘do you best’ (as you might for an interview) but there was a plan B were I incapable of delivering a satisfactory rewrite. It was a low-risk scenario for my employer while a massive opportunity for myself.	On the other end of the spectrum is when nothing is expected. While less stressful for the intern, setups with non-existent expectations do little to help either party. The intern has to press for tasks and access to relevant systems. And the employer learns little about the skills of the person they’re considering. When I was in a situation like this I felt sort of disrespected - I thought I was being hired for my skills but it turned out that I was more like a corporate requirement that had to be filled. Please don’t hire interns (or full-time employees for that matter) if you have nothing for them to do.	Aside from opportunity cost, Interns usually don’t have much at risk during less-than-ideal internships since they are often at-will or within a set timeframe (the duration of summer break, for example). The main thing to keep in mind (especially for internships that have no set end date) is that internships are a two-party dance in which you must respect your partner while trying to maximize their use to you. If you meet an ambitious entrepreneur who wants you to be a pivotal part of their team (the Woz to their Jobs, if you will), make sure you are adequately compensated - getting in on the ground floor of a budding startup can seem like (and be) a great opportunity, but that only holds true so long as you aren’t overworked and underpaid. Young people are especially easy to take advantage of since they have a limited amount of experience and internships seem like the best low-risk places to gain these sorts of experiences. Engineers must vigilantly screen anyone we work for to protect ourselves from the overzealous and under-technical.	Some of my most rewarding experiences came from part-time internships throughout the school year - it allowed for a smoothing of the flow of intern-appropriate tasks. As a youth I often imagined that internships were only summer things, but the work I did during the school-year ended up being critical to both my understanding of the coursework as well as my performance in industry. I think being ‘always on’ was a fantastic way to immerse myself in the software engineering field. Part-time positions may also be less work for the employers since they’ll only have to deal with (and pay) and intern 10-25 hours per week.	Thanks go out to the folks who hired me while I was in school - I’ll be sure to follow your example if I’m ever in a position to do so.
